The distance approach identifies pairs using the correlation of (normalized) asset prices or
their returns, and is simple and orders of magnitude less computationally intensive than
cointegration tests. 
The speed advantage is particularly valuable. This is because the number of potential
pairs is the product of the number of candidates to be considered on either side so that
evaluating combinations of 100 stocks  requires comparing 10,000 tests 

On the other hand, distance metrics do not necessarily select the most profitable pairs:
correlation is maximized for perfect co-movement, which, in turn, eliminates actual
trading opportunities. 

Empirical studies confirm that the volatility of the price spread of
cointegrated pairs is almost twice as high as the volatility of the price spread of distance
pairs 
.
To balance the tradeoff between computational cost and the quality of the resulting
pairs, Krauss (2017) recommends a procedure that combines both approaches based on his
literature review:


1. Select pairs with a stable spread that shows little drift to reduce the number of
candidates
2. Test the remaining pairs with the highest spread variance for cointegration
This process aims to select cointegrated pairs with lower divergence risk while ensuring
more volatile spreads that, in turn, generate higher profit opportunities.


Process steps
1.Compute following distance metrics

The drift of the spread, defined as a linear regression of a time trend on the spread
The spread's volatility
The correlations between the normalized price series and between their returns



Low drift and volatility, as well as high correlation, are simple proxies for cointegration.
To evaluate the predictive power of these heuristics, we also run Engle-Granger and
Johansen cointegration tests using statsmodels for the preceding pairs.

Next,
We first estimate the optimal number of lags that we need to specify for the Johansen test.
For both tests, we assume that the cointegrated series (the spread) may have an intercept
different from zero but no trend:


To check for the significance of the cointegration tests, we compare the Johansen trace
statistic for rank 0 and 1 to their respective critical values and obtain the Engle-Granger
p-value.




We follow the recommendation by Gonzalo and Lee (1998), mentioned at the end of the
previous section, to apply both tests and accept pairs where they agree. The authors suggest
additional due diligence in case of disagreement, which we are going to skip:
spreads['trace_sig'] = ((spreads.trace0 > trace0_cv) &
(spreads.trace1 > trace1_cv)).astype(int)
spreads['eg_sig'] = (spreads.p < .05).astype(int)
For the over 500*551/2 across both sample periods, the Johansen test considers 3.2 percent
of the relationships as significant, while the Engle-Granger considers 6.5 percent. They
agree on 366 pairs (0.79 percent).


Outcome:we select pairs where both the Johansen and the Engle-
Granger tests agree for trading.



Smoothing prices with the Kalman filter
To this end, we first apply a rolling Kalman filter (KF) to remove some noise
Computing the rolling hedge ratio using the Kalman filter
To obtain a dynamic hedge ratio, we use the KF for rolling linear regression

Estimating the half-life of mean reversion
If we view the spread as a mean-reverting stochastic process in continuous time, we can
model it as an Ornstein-Uhlenbeck process. The benefit of this perspective is that we gain
a formula for the half-life of mean reversion, as an approximation of the time required for
the spread to converge again after a deviation

Now, we can compute the spread for each candidate pair based on a rolling hedge ratio.
We also calculate a Bollinger Band because we will consider moves of the spread larger
than two rolling standard deviations away from its moving average as long and short entry
signals, and crossings of the moving average in reverse as exit signals.
